# Genetic Overlap between Alzheimer's, Parkinson’s, and healthy patients

## Background
This study aims to find gene expression similarities and differences between patients of Alzheimer's (AD) and Parkinson's (PD). The study uses sequencing data from microRNA (abbreviated miRNA) found in two the body's biofluids, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood serum (SER). Although these disorders are experienced by many people, little is known about what specifically causes the two diseases and how to prevent or cure them. The difficulty in finding these solutions arises from the complexity of the "pathomechanisms" underlying the diseases, as well as their tendencies to have early stages that are asymptomatic, making detection very challenging until symptoms set in [1].

This is where our study comes into play. With our analysis, we aim to study the genetic causes underlying the two diseases by inspecting the sequencing data found in patients' bodies in the form of miRNA sequences. Uncovering the genetics behind the diseases can help researchers better their understanding of the development of AD and PD in humans and improve their chances of finding efficient preventative measures for the two disorders. Furthermore, the similarities that we may find between the disorders can aid in the research of neural disorders in general, and contribute to early diagnosis, prevention, and cures.

-----

## Psychiatric Disorders
### Alzheimer's
Alzheimer's disease is a progressive brain disorder that heavily impacts brain function in that it slowly deteriorates memory and thinking skills, leading to symptoms like forgetting recent events or conversations, to eventually losing the ability to carry out simple tasks or even recognize friends and family members. Difficulty in reasoning and thinking is also a common symptom, especially with abstract concepts like numbers, again making everyday tasks like paying bills challenging. AD also impairs people's abilities to make decisions in everyday situations, like driving. The principal risk factor of Alzheimer's is age; people become more likely to to develop AD as they grow older. Family history can also increase a person's chances of developing the disease. A genetic link to increased chance of AD shows in the form of a variation of the gene APOE e4, something we will definitely explore further in our study. As of now, there is no known cure for AD, but medications have been known to improve or slow the effect of the disease, and programs and caregivers help to support AD patients. [2]

### Parkinson's
Parkinson's disease is a progress nervous system disorder that impacts movement. There are a myriad of symptoms that constitute PD, including a tremor (trembling) in a limb like a hand or fingers, slowed movement, rigid muscles, and impaired posture and balance. PD is also sometimes accompanies by other complications, like cognitive issues (trouble thinking, dementia), emotional changes (like depression), swallowing, chewing, and eating problems, among others. The principal risk factor of PD is age; PD usually develops in people age 60 or older. Other risk factors include family history and sex (men are more likely to develop it than women). As of now, there are no known cures or even prevention methods for Parkinson's. However, there are medications that can ease the symptoms, as well as surgeries that can regulate parts of the brain to improve symptoms. [3]

------

## miRNA and CSF/SER
Our sequence data comes from the encodings of microRNA strands. microRNA (miRNA) are a class of non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression. Specifically, they bind to specific mRNA and prevent those target mRNA from translating the necessary directions to produce certain proteins. Because of the behavior of miRNA, it will be worthwhile to explore which miRNA are binding to which mRNA, and subsequently what proteins are being down-regulated (lowly expressed). These proteins could then be contributing factors to the symptoms and/or development of the two diseases. [4]

The miRNA in our study was sourced from two locations (specifically, fluids found in our body): cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood serum (SER). These two fluids are part of the central nervous system, which are highly impacted by both PD and AD. CSF cushions the brain and is a "shock absorber" for the central nervous system, and also removes waste products from the brain [5]. Blood serum (or serum) is the fluid that blood cells move through, but without the plasma - it is the clear liquid that remains after blood clots. [6] miRNA is found in serum as "secreted miRNAs", meaning miRNA that has been excreted from cells or tissues. [7]
